[TEP-0145] CEL in WhenExpression (#1074)
tektoncd/community: teps/0145-cel-in-whenexpression.md

- [Argo][Argo]: `Workflows` support conditional execution using a when property to specify whether to run or skip a `Step` ([example][argo example]).
- [GitHub Actions][GitHub Actions]: supports evaluating expressions in `if` of a `step`.
- [Jenkins][Jenkins]: executes the stage when the specified Groovy expression evaluates to true.
- [Spinnaker][Spinnaker]: Uses string expressions, `Stages` only run when expressions evaluate to `True`.

## Proposal

We propose to add a `cel` field under `WhenExpression` and the type is `string`. Same as [CelCustomRun][CELCustomRun], we propose to use [cel-go][cel-go] for the expression evaluation. So users can craft any valid CEL expression as defined by the [cel-spec][cel-spec] language definition.

### Syntax

In this section we will show how CEL can support the [use cases](#use-cases).

#### Use CEL to replace current WhenExpression
```yaml
# current WhenWxpressions
when:
  - input: "foo"
    operator: "in"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]
  - input: "duh"
    operator: "notin"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]

# with cel
when:
  - cel: "\”foo\” in [\"foo\", \“bar\”]”
  - cel: "\”duh\” not in [\"foo\", \“bar\”]”
```

> **Note:** The `WhenExpressions` contains a list of `WhenExpression`, if any `WhenExpression` is false it will return false. So we’re using ANY to evaluate the list of `WhenExpressions`. And this will remain the same for this proposal. For each WhenExpression, there will be one CEL expression which can fully replace the current when expression functionalities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Note:** The `WhenExpressions` contains a list of `WhenExpression`, if all `WhenExpressions` are true it will return true and allow execution. So we’re using AND to evaluate the list of `WhenExpressions`. And this will remain the same for this proposal. Each existing `WhenExpression` can be replaced with a CEL expression.
```

  - cel: "\”duh\” not in [\"foo\", \“bar\”]”
```

**Note:** The `WhenExpressions` contains a list of `WhenExpression`, if all `WhenExpressions` are true it will return true and allow execution. So we’re using AND to evaluate the list of `WhenExpressions`. And this will remain the same for this proposal. Each existing `WhenExpression` can be replaced with a CEL expression.

#### Use CEL to Support ANY operator

This is the workaround from [#3591][#3591],
```yaml
  when:
    - input: "$(params.param1)$(params.param2)"
      operator: notin
      values: [""]
```

With CEL we can use a more intuitive expression to support it.
```yaml
  when:
    - cel: "\"$(params.param1)\" != \"\" || \"$(params.param2)\" != \"\""
```

#### Use CEL to Support Numeric Comparisons

This is not possible with current `WhenExpression`. With CEL we can do:

```yaml
  when:
    - cel: "\"$(tasks.unit-test.results.test-coverage)\" >= 0.9"
```

[Note:][numeric note] currently there are no automatic arithmetic conversions for the numeric types (int, uint, and double), so the emitted results must be the same numeric type to make sure the evaluation works.

### Validation

> The new fields will be gated by a new feature flag, `enable-cel-whenexpression`, which will defaults to `"false"` while the feature is in alpha.

Author: Yeah I agree, I will change it to `enable-api-fields`

> The validation webhook will validate either the current when `input`+`operator`+`values` or `cel` is used, users cannot use both at the same time for one `WhenExpression`.

Reviewer 2: I'm wondering if the validation webhook can validate if the given CEL expression is syntactically valid or not?

Author: Oh this is a great suggestion! Thanks!

- support more complex conditional execution instead of hacky workaround

### Drawbacks

Users need to be familar with CEL expression syntax to use it properly, this may be a learning curve but they can choose to use current `WhenExpression` syntax for simple cases.

## Alternatives

### Support More Operators in current WhenExpression
Tekton can support more operators from [k8s apimachinery][k8s apimachinery] in `WhenExpression`'s `Operator`.

### Use languages other than CEL
CEL has been adopted in Tekton Triggers and CustomTask. We could add it first and consider other languages support as future work.

## Implementation Plan

### Update existing fields in v1 API

Add `CEL` to `WhenExpression`:
```go
type WhenExpression struct {
	// Input is the string for guard checking which can be a static input or an output from a parent Task
	Input string `json:"input"`

	// Operator that represents an Input's relationship to the values
	Operator selection.Operator `json:"operator"`

	// Values is an array of strings, which is compared against the input, for guard checking
	// It must be non-empty
	// +listType=atomic
	Values []string `json:"values"`

>     // CEL is a CEL expression to evaluate, if follows the cel-spec language definition

Reviewer 2: nit: indentation

- [Argo][Argo]: `Workflows` support conditional execution using a when property to specify whether to run or skip a `Step` ([example][argo example]).
- [GitHub Actions][GitHub Actions]: supports evaluating expressions in `if` of a `step` to enable conditional execution.
- [Jenkins][Jenkins]: executes the stage when the specified Groovy expression evaluates to true.
- [Spinnaker][Spinnaker]: Uses string expressions, `Stages` only run when expressions evaluate to `True`.

## Proposal

This doc proposes to add a `string` type field `cel` under `WhenExpression`. Like [CelCustomRun][CELCustomRun], we propose to use [cel-go][cel-go] for the expression evaluation. This will allow users to craft any valid CEL expression as defined by the [cel-spec][cel-spec] language definition.

### Syntax

In this section we will show how CEL can support the [use cases](#use-cases).

#### Use CEL to replace current WhenExpression
```yaml
# current WhenWxpressions
when:
  - input: "foo"
    operator: "in"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]
  - input: "duh"
    operator: "notin"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]

# with cel
when:
  - cel: "\”foo\” in [\"foo\", \“bar\”]”

>   - cel: "\”duh\” not in [\"foo\", \“bar\”]”

Reviewer 3: Using a mix of `'` and `"` would work as well, wouldn't it ?

Author: Yes, I will fix those

```

**Note:** The `WhenExpressions` contains a list of `WhenExpression`, if all `WhenExpressions` are true it will return true and allow execution. So we’re using AND to evaluate the list of `WhenExpressions`. And this will remain the same for this proposal. Each existing `WhenExpression` can be replaced with a CEL expression.

#### Use CEL to Support ANY operator

This is the workaround from [#3591][#3591],
```yaml
  when:
    - input: "$(params.param1)$(params.param2)"
      operator: notin
      values: [""]
```

With CEL we can use a more intuitive expression to support it.
```yaml
  when:
    - cel: "\"$(params.param1)\" != \"\" || \"$(params.param2)\" != \"\""
```

#### Use CEL to Support Numeric Comparisons

This is not possible with current `WhenExpression`. With CEL we can do:

```yaml
  when:
    - cel: "\"$(tasks.unit-test.results.test-coverage)\" >= 0.9"
```

[Note:][numeric note] currently there are no automatic arithmetic conversions for the numeric types (int, uint, and double), so the emitted results must be the same numeric type to make sure the evaluation works.

### Validation

> The new fields will be gated by `enable-api-fields`, which will default to false while the feature is in alpha.When per feature flag (TEP-0138) is implemented, we will use a dedicated feature flag `enable-cel-when-expression` to gate this feature.

Reviewer 3: Why do we talk about `enable-api-fields` at all here ? We can just decide to only use a dedicated feature flag.

Author: Yes my previous version of the proposal is using a dedicated feature flag. But I saw the comment here https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/7162#discussion_r1342965164 and changed it to the group flag. 
@JeromeJu  Would a dedicated feature flag be ok to use?

Reviewer 4: Thanks for the checkin!
Currently we are able to/ should switch to per-feature flag! But while actually making that happen we've been waiting for some of the PRs to get merged in:
i.e. https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/pull/6941 and another [setup for the CI tests](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing/issues/1629) (not blocking any per-feature flag but would be nice to have the plumbing set up).

Author: I will update this proposal to use dedicated feature flag

Reviewer 4: Thanks @Yongxuanzhang for the responsive conversation and updates!

For these reasons, `WhenExpressions` would be a good place to start introducing CEL in Tekton Pipelines. This would allow users to write more concise and powerful conditional expressions, and it could be extended to other fields in the future.

### Use Cases

- Cover all the functionalities of current `WhenExpression` and offer a simpler way of having the conditional execution
- Support ANY: e.g. Execute the task with if any params is not empty
- Support numeric operators such as GreaterThan/LessThan, e.g. Execute the task if test coverage is large than a certain number.

### Goals
- Support CEL in `WhenExpression`.

### Non-Goals
- Support CEL in Pipeline API fields other than `WhenExpression`.

### Requirements
- The syntax should be extensible to support other expression languages in the future if needed.

> - Users cannot inject CEL via variables such as params and results.

Reviewer 5: Is this temporary or will be restricted in future too? 

I do not have any specific use case but trying to evaluate and understand if we are open to this in future on a need basis.

Author: Did you mean the `Users cannot inject CEL via variables such as params and results.` We think this will be restricted in the future as well for security concerns. The problem is similar to https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/1077

Reviewer 5: This is a little ambiguous, suggest rephrasing this requirement to:

```
The pipeline authors cannot inject an entire CEL expression using a variable such as params or results i.e. CEL expression can include params and results which will be resolved but params and results cannot hold an entire valid CEL expression. This requirement is imposed due to a security concern as described in [TEP-0146](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/1077).
```

### Related Work

Similar expression evaluations are supported in other CI/CD tools in the industry:
- [Argo][Argo]: `Workflows` support conditional execution using a when property to specify whether to run or skip a `Step` ([example][argo example]).
- [GitHub Actions][GitHub Actions]: supports evaluating expressions in `if` of a `step` to enable conditional execution.
- [Jenkins][Jenkins]: executes the stage when the specified Groovy expression evaluates to true.
- [Spinnaker][Spinnaker]: Uses string expressions, `Stages` only run when expressions evaluate to `True`.

> ## Proposal

Reviewer 5: The task results in `whenExpressions` plays a key role in building a graph through resource dependency. Are we going to continue supporting the same design principle?

I am open either ways - but pointing it out so that we document it here in the proposal.

Author: Yes we do want to support it. I have mentioned this in the variable substitution section, let me add it as one requirement as well.

Author: Added it as a requirement

This doc proposes to add a `string` type field `cel` under `WhenExpression`. Like [CelCustomRun][CELCustomRun], we propose to use [cel-go][cel-go] for the expression evaluation. This will allow users to craft any valid CEL expression as defined by the [cel-spec][cel-spec] language definition.

### Syntax

In this section we will show how CEL can support the [use cases](#use-cases).

#### Use CEL to replace current WhenExpression
```yaml
# current WhenWxpressions
when:
  - input: "foo"
    operator: "in"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]
  - input: "duh"
    operator: "notin"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]

# with cel
when:
  - cel: "'foo' in ['foo', 'bar']”
  - cel: "'duh' not in ['foo', 'bar']”
```

**Note:** The `WhenExpressions` contains a list of `WhenExpression`, if all `WhenExpressions` are true it will return true and allow execution. So we’re using AND to evaluate the list of `WhenExpressions`. And this will remain the same for this proposal. Each existing `WhenExpression` can be replaced with a CEL expression.

> 

Reviewer 5: The two biggest disadvantages of `whenExpression` are (1) limited by a single operator (`in` or `notin`) for any given expression and (2) the list of expressions are evaluated using `and` operator.

With `CEL`, many conditional logic might not require more than one `whenExpressions` and might not be limited to both these shortcomings of existing `whenExpressions`.

Along with this note, its worth explicitly defining the power of `CEL` in which users might not even be worried about this.

Author: Thanks!!

Author: Added

#### Use CEL to Support ANY operator

This is the workaround from [#3591][#3591],
```yaml
  when:
    - input: "$(params.param1)$(params.param2)"
      operator: notin
      values: [""]

> ```

Reviewer 5: Right, this is a workaround but @durera was hopping to implement more complex logic but chose to go this route since their desired conditional logic is not supported.

The desired conditional logic is:

```yaml
      whenAny:
        - input: "$(params.param1)"
          operator: notin
          values: [""]
        - input: "$(params.param2)"
          operator: in
          values: ["8.5", "8.6"]
```

which I think can supported with a single `CEL` expression:

```yaml
  when:
    cel: "'$(params.param1)' != '' || '$(params.param2)' == '8.5' || $(params.param2)' == '8.6'"
```

Do we know if there is any limitation on the length of the `cel` expression? If so, its worth documenting here.

Author: Thanks! I missed the original one the user wants to use. Updated.

Author: For the length limitation, I have searched a bit but could not find answers...

With CEL we can use a more intuitive expression to support it.
```yaml
  when:
    - cel: "'$(params.param1)' != '' || '$(params.param2)' != ''"
```

#### Use CEL to Support Numeric Comparisons

This is not possible with current `WhenExpression`. With CEL we can do:

```yaml
  when:
    - cel: "'$(tasks.unit-test.results.test-coverage)' >= 0.9"
```

[Note:][numeric note] currently there are no automatic arithmetic conversions for the numeric types (int, uint, and double), so the emitted results must be the same numeric type to make sure the evaluation works.

#### Use CEL to Support Pattern Matching:

This is not possible with current `WhenExpression`. With CEL we can do:

```yaml
  when:
    - cel: '$(params.branch)'.matches('release/.*')"
```

> ### Variables Substitution

Author: Hi @vdemeester, I added one more section since last time you reviewed. This section will discuss how we handle variable substitution in CEL expression and how we can prevent the attack. PTAL 🙏

> The CEL in When Expressions should support current Tekton’s Params and Results [string substitutions](https://github.com/tektoncd/pipeline/blob/main/docs/variables.md#variables-available-in-a-pipeline). Array and object substitutions are not supported because Tekton doesn’t support whole array/object replacements in a string.

Reviewer 5: is this true? `values` is an array and it does honor the star notation, isn't it? 

Its reasonable to implement only string params with CEL but are we supporting indexing into an array or referencing an object param using a key in CEL expressions?

Author: Yes, I should clarify that we cannot reference to a whole array or object.

Author: I remember there is an issue that we cannot reference param in "script", the case where a long string contains param reference. 

I will remove this statement, and rephrase that we will support string replacements first

Author: Removed this statement

To address this, we need to:
- Prevent the attack by adding sanity check;
- Explicitly document that passing CEL expression from param is not allowed and won’t be executed.

The solution we proposed is to let CEL handle the variable substitution:
1. Add params, results, context variables to CEL's environment, similar like [Tekton Triggers](https://github.com/tektoncd/triggers/blob/main/pkg/interceptors/cel/cel.go#L104C1-L112)
2. Find all variable references in the CEL expression string and remove the '$()' from those references.
3. CEL would do the replacement with 1 and 2 with built-in variable substitution

### Validation

The new fields will be gated by `cel-in-whenexpression`, which will default to false while the feature is in alpha.

The validation webhook will validate
1. The feature flag is enabled

> 2. If the flag is enabled, either the current when input+operator+values or cel is used, users cannot use both at the same time for one WhenExpression, but they can use different syntax for different WhenExpressions.

Author: highlighted it

            workspace: source
        runAfter:
          - create-file
        taskSpec:
          params:
            - name: path
          workspaces:
            - name: source
              description: The workspace to check for the file
          results:
            - name: exists
              description: indicates whether the file exists or is missing
          steps:
            - name: check-file
              image: alpine
              script: |
                if test -f $(workspaces.source.path)/$(params.path); then
                  printf yes | tee $(results.exists.path)
                else
                  printf no | tee $(results.exists.path)
                fi
      - name: echo-file-exists
        when:
          - cel: "'$(tasks.check-file.results.exists)' in ['yes']"
        taskSpec:
          steps:
            - name: echo
              image: ubuntu
              script: 'echo file exists'
    finally:
      - name: finally-task-should-be-executed
        when:
          - cel: "'$(tasks.echo-file-exists.status)' == 'Succeeded'"
          - cel: "'$(tasks.status)' ==  'Succeeded'"
          - cel: "'$(tasks.check-file.results.exists)' == 'yes'"

>           - cel: "'$(params.path)' == 'README.md'"

Reviewer: @Yongxuanzhang this example is using params and result, but the requirement says that they won't be supported, could you please clarify?

Reviewer 5: I have requested to clarify the requirement - https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/1074/files#r1357605404

Author: Thanks @pritidesai! I have updated the requirement to clarify. We can do variable replacements, but users cannot set a CEL expression for params.

## Implementation Plan

### Update existing fields in v1 API

Add `CEL` to `WhenExpression`:
```go
type WhenExpression struct {
	// Input is the string for guard checking which can be a static input or an output from a parent Task
	Input string `json:"input"`

	// Operator that represents an Input's relationship to the values
	Operator selection.Operator `json:"operator"`

	// Values is an array of strings, which is compared against the input, for guard checking
	// It must be non-empty
	// +listType=atomic
	Values []string `json:"values"`

    // CEL is a CEL expression to evaluate, if follows the cel-spec language definition
	CEL string `json:"cel",omitempty`
}
```

### Upgrade and Migration Strategy

This feature will be introduced in alpha with a dedicated feature flag which is disabled by default.

When the feature is promoted to beta, the dedicated feature flag will be enabled by default.

When the feature is promoted to stable, the dedicated feature flag will be removed and the feature will be available by default.

### Implementation Pull Requests

TODO

## References
- [Tekon Trigger][Trigger]
- [CELCustomRun][CELCustomRun]
- [cel-go][cel-go]

> [Trigger]: https://tekton.dev/docs/triggers/cel_expressions/

Reviewer 5: All these references are missing `-` and hence not showing up in https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/739fffd0e7303dbef25c861e32cd7b57eb0c0107/teps/0145-cel-in-whenexpression.md#references unless that's the intention.

Author: Yes this is intention. e.g. we don't need to add https://tekton.dev/docs/triggers/cel_expressions/ link to everywhere we use Trigger, we can just use [Trigger](Trigger) to link it

We should support Tekton’s variable substitution for 2 reasons:
- This is consistent with all other variable substitution syntax in Tekton, and thus more intuitive for Tekton users;
- This would help to build the dag of Pipeline Tasks, as tasks in a pipeline will check the result reference and build the dependency between Tasks.

We cannot use the current Tekton's variable substitution directly. Because the current variables substitution has the the similar security concern as [TEP-0146](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/pull/1077), for example, users can inject a CEL expression from the `Param` and it could alter the result of the CEL which referenced that `Param` in `WhenExpression`, or execute a CEL which consume more resources than expected.

To address this, we need to:
- Prevent the attack by adding sanity check;
- Explicitly document that passing CEL expression from param is not allowed and won’t be executed.

The solution we proposed is to let CEL handle the variable substitution:

> 1. Add params, results, context variables to CEL's environment, similar like [Tekton Triggers](https://github.com/tektoncd/triggers/blob/main/pkg/interceptors/cel/cel.go#L104C1-L112)

Reviewer 4: I think the tekton trigger examples are nice to add. Would you mind also clarifying the environment here?

Author: I added link to the cel environment, it would add too many details here if we want to add code snippets.

2. Find all variable references in the CEL expression string and remove the '$()' from those references.
3. CEL would do the replacement with 1 and 2 with built-in variable substitution

### Validation

The new fields will be gated by `cel-in-whenexpression`, which will default to false while the feature is in alpha.

The validation webhook will validate
1. The feature flag is enabled

> 2. If the flag is enabled, either the current when input+operator+values or cel is used, users cannot use both at the same time for one WhenExpression, but they can use different syntax for different WhenExpressions.

Reviewer 4: This might have already been mentioned during the WG, just wondering if this would need to include the backwards compatibility?

Author: Sure, will add now

Tekton can support more operators from [k8s apimachinery][k8s apimachinery] in `WhenExpression`'s `Operator`.

### Use languages other than CEL
CEL has been adopted in Tekton Triggers and CustomTask. We could add it first and consider other languages support as future work.

## Implementation Plan

### Update existing fields in v1 API

Add `CEL` to `WhenExpression`:
```go
type WhenExpression struct {
	// Input is the string for guard checking which can be a static input or an output from a parent Task
	Input string `json:"input"`

	// Operator that represents an Input's relationship to the values
	Operator selection.Operator `json:"operator"`

	// Values is an array of strings, which is compared against the input, for guard checking
	// It must be non-empty
	// +listType=atomic
	Values []string `json:"values"`

    // CEL is a CEL expression to evaluate, if follows the cel-spec language definition
	CEL string `json:"cel",omitempty`
}
```

### Upgrade and Migration Strategy

This feature will be introduced in alpha with a dedicated feature flag which is disabled by default.

When the feature is promoted to beta, the dedicated feature flag will be enabled by default.

> When the feature is promoted to stable, the dedicated feature flag will be removed and the feature will be available by default.

Reviewer 4: Thanks for this section @Yongxuanzhang  🙏

Similar expression evaluations are supported in other CI/CD tools in the industry:
- [Argo][Argo]: `Workflows` support conditional execution using a when property to specify whether to run or skip a `Step` ([example][argo example]).
- [GitHub Actions][GitHub Actions]: supports evaluating expressions in `if` of a `step` to enable conditional execution.
- [Jenkins][Jenkins]: executes the stage when the specified Groovy expression evaluates to true.
- [Spinnaker][Spinnaker]: Uses string expressions, `Stages` only run when expressions evaluate to `True`.

## Proposal

This doc proposes to add a `string` type field `cel` under `WhenExpression`. Like [CelCustomRun][CELCustomRun], we propose to use [cel-go][cel-go] for the expression evaluation. This will allow users to craft any valid CEL expression as defined by the [cel-spec][cel-spec] language definition.

### Syntax

In this section we will show how CEL can support the [use cases](#use-cases).

#### Use CEL to replace current WhenExpression
```yaml
# current WhenWxpressions
when:
  - input: "foo"
    operator: "in"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]
  - input: "duh"
    operator: "notin"
    values: ["foo", “bar”]

# with cel

> when:
>   - cel: "'foo' in ['foo', 'bar']”
>   - cel: "'duh' not in ['foo', 'bar']”

Reviewer: fix formatting
```suggestion
when:
  - cel: "'foo' in ['foo', 'bar']"
  - cel: "'duh' not in ['foo', 'bar']”
```

Author: Thanks!
